# 👥 Development guide

This project is for personal use and not open for public contributions. Here, I describe how to develop and test Dev Container Features locally for future reference.

## 🛠️ Tech stack

This project uses the following tech stack:

- [Bash](https://www.gnu.org/software/bash/)
- [Dev Container CLI](https://github.com/devcontainers/cli)

## 📂 Key directory structure

- `.devcontainer.example/`: Development environment configuration
- `.vscode.example/`: Project-specific VS Code configuration example
- `src/`: Source of each feature
- `test/`: Tests for each feature
  - `test/_global`: Tests for global scenarios
- `flake.lock`, `flake.nix`: Flake configuration for development environment
- `Justfile`: Commands for development

## 🔧 Set up development environment

For development, you need to have the following tools installed:

### 🐋 System requirements

You would need to have [Docker](https://www.docker.com/) installed. This is not installable via Nix Flakes, so you need to install it manually on your host machine.

### ❄️ Tools managed via Nix Flakes

This repository uses [Nix Flakes](https://nix.dev/concepts/flakes.html) to manage tools. Following tools will be automatically installed (you need `nix` installed, of course):

- `devcontainer`
- [Just](https://just.systems/) (`just`)
- `pre-commit`
- `shellcheck`
- `shfmt`

We have configuration ([devcontainer.json](./.devcontainer.example/devcontainer.json)) for it, with Nix and Docker (DinD) installed. All you need to do is to run `nix develop` to start the development environment then run `just install` to install dependencies.

## ⌨️ Adding a new feature

You can add new feature in the following way:

- Copy and paste existing feature as a template in `src/` directory and make changes to it
- Add tests in `test/` directory
- Run `just test <feature-id>` to test the feature

New feature will be automatically caught by automation workflow and you don't need to update any registry manually.

> [!NOTE]
> You don't need to make the documentation complete right away. The documentation will be automatically generated by release workflow, you can autogenerate draft by running `devcontainer features generate-docs --namespace lasuillard/devcontainer-features` at the project root though.

## ✅ Verifying changes

Before you push your code, you need to verify your code changes if it follows with the project's coding standard. You can run `just ci` to run all the necessary linters, formatters, and **SOME** tests. Only specific features will be tested because testing feature could be a bit time-consuming job.

## 🚀 Releasing features

Once code is pushed to the repository, features can be released via [release.yaml](./.github/workflows/release.yaml) workflow. You should manually dispatch the workflow to trigger the release process.
